---
layout: post
title: Hack Day
post_date: April 3, 2009
---

I think I'll write more often if I let myself post things that are shorter and less edited than I've been doing. Let's test that theory.

My company has decided to sponsor a Hack Day next week. There's been a lot of internal talk the last few years about how to start modernizing our Systems department and attracting/retaining younger talent. I think this is one good way to do it.

The idea is modeled after Yahoo!'s hack days. You form into small groups, grab some laptops, load them up with whatever stuff you want, and code a quick proof of concept for something you think would be cool for the company to have. At the end of the event, everybody gives an informal demo to a crowd of other participants and managers. There will be pizza and drinks. I think maybe some voting -- everybody likes voting.

My team's working on getting our stuff set up at the moment. The bulk of the actual coding will be done this coming Wednesday during the real event, but we're getting everything in place and doing a little design ahead of time so there's less friction to overcome once we get down to business.

I realize that Hack Days have been around for a while, but my company is pretty conservative, and this is a big step for it. It's out of character for them to be so loose with an event like this. We were given factory stock laptops to work on (no corporate restrictions), we get non-firewalled Internet access, and we can install just about anything we want on them (Legal has to approve, but they've been extremely accommodating so far), even Ubuntu!.

Like I said, nothing remarkable for the tech industry at large, but I'm really happy that we are finally willing to start moving in this direction. It makes me actually kind of believe in some of the rhetoric about modernizing our department I hear from upper management.
